# Flight-Delay-Viz
A flight delay visual

Documentation of Work Flow By The Team:

The group members met virtually a total of three times to discuss checkpoints for the project and discuss our personal sticking points with our portions and met during in-class labs to clarify ideas and help each other out. We initially struggled to figure out a cohesive way to have our project work together as we set out to code our inividual parts on our own then combine in person, but by early May, we decided to fimilarize ourselves with collaboration through Git and eventually learned how to push, pull, and merge our code into this streamlined repo. 

The overall breakdown we chose to follow in terms of dividing tasks was to assign specific perception encodings to two group members (Neha and Caroline) and the third member to work on data cleaning and work on the data accessibility in the script.js file (Ananya). 

The data cleaning process was a bit challenging as we originally explored datasets that incorporate international data, but it was  difficult to find a standardized database with airport codes that could be mapped to latitude and longitude points. As a result, we shifted to a United States based domestic flight dataset. After choosing the datset to work with, we noticed the sheer size of the dataset would not be practical to model on our visualization, so we created a condensed dataset using sqllite (a vscode extension) to reduce a 1,300,000+ entry dataset to 30,000 entries, specifically limited to the month of January 2008 as this month seemed to have the most documented set of flights out of the 12 months present in the dataset. The next hurdle was to figure out how to extract the latitude and longitude information for each flight code present in the dataset, as we needed these coordinates to mark the start and endpoints of the arrows on the visualization. We initially researched APIs such as Aviation Stack to see if we could dynamically pull coordinates per airport code, and during this research, we looked through GitHub repos and came across https://github.com/jpatokal/openflights's open resource for airport code mappings. Ananya was comfortable with Python script writing, so she wrote two scripts to generate relevant CSV files (generateOriginCoordinates.csv and generateDestCoordinates.csv) that contained the information we needed. Caroline then took these 2 CSV files and wrote an additional Python script to create a final JSON file (flights.json) for ease of encoding the data into our JavaScript. 

Caroline then took the JSON file and implemented the code to put the datapoints onto the map as curves from the origin to the destination, creating a slider to select the date that the user wants to analyze at any given moment. She also added a tooltip so the user could hover over any flight curve on the screen and see the exact details, including the delay in minutes.

Neha was responsible for implementing the visual encoding of flight delays using color and size within the D3.js visualization. She also implemented the zoom-in functionality, completed the color-coded scale and legend, and added flight animations to enhance the interactivity and clarity of the visualization. She also collaborated with Ananya to create the writeup and added the preliminary visualization to the write-up on the webpage.
